Foretelling dominant traits
that would exist in the last days,
2 Timothy chapter 3 says
that “men will be lovers of themselves.”
Is it wrong for us to love ourselves?
No, it’s normal, even necessary,
to have a healthy love of oneself.
After all, Jesus said:
“You must love your neighbor as yourself.”
And we’ll talk more about that in a minute.
However, the love mentioned here
is distorted and selfish.
And because it prevents love of neighbor,
it becomes a barrier to peace.
Some Bible scholars suggest that Paul
put love of self at the top of his list
at 2 Timothy 3:1-5
because all the remaining
negative characteristics in the list
result from it.
And those traits too are a barrier to peace.
For example,
“not [being] open to any agreement”
mentioned at 2 Timothy 3:3,
often leads to “anger, wrath,
screaming, and abusive speech.”
Rather than bringing peace,
such a lack of self-control
“stirs up strife.”
On the other hand, love of neighbor
has the opposite effect.
It leads to genuine peace.
Please turn to Matthew chapter 22,
verse 36.
One of the Pharisees versed in the Law
tests Jesus:
“Teacher,
which is the greatest commandment
in the Law?”
Jesus responded with the words in verse 37
just considered at length
in the preceding talk:
“You must love Jehovah your God.”
But then, Jesus goes
beyond the original question
and quotes a second commandment.
Let’s read verse 39:
“The second, like it, is this:
‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’”
Jesus is saying that the two commandments
—love of God and love of neighbor—
are linked.
Now, how exactly would you define “neighbor”?
Please turn to Luke chapter 10.
Notice how Jesus answered this very question:
“Who really is my neighbor?”
Jesus responds clearly
with his renowned illustration
of the neighborly Samaritan.
In Jesus’ day, the Jews disdained Samaritans.
Their attitude moved Jesus
to make a powerful point.
In his illustration,
Jesus said that the Samaritan
took extraordinary measures
to help a Jewish man.
The Jew had fallen victim to robbers,
and his own countrymen ignored him
—leaving him half-dead.
What Jesus said
must have stunned the audience.
Luke 10:33, 34 reads:
“But a certain Samaritan
“traveling the road came upon him,
“and at seeing him, he was moved with pity.
“So he approached him
and bandaged his wounds,
“pouring oil and wine on them.
“Then he mounted him on his own animal
and brought him to an inn
and took care of him.”
Jesus then asked a penetrating question
in verse 36:
“Who of these three
seems to you
to have made himself neighbor?”
His words recorded in verse 37
are also directed to you and to me:
“Go and do the same yourself.”
Yes, our neighbors include
not only our family members
and our Christian brothers and sisters
but all whom we encounter from day to day.
In other words, our love
extends to those who are not of our own race,
tribe, nationality, or religion.
How do we show that love?
Please turn with me to Romans chapter 13.
Because we love our neighbor,
we avoid conduct that disrupts peace.
Instead, we strive to apply
the inspired counsel
at Romans 13:8-10:
“Do not owe anything to anyone
except to love one another;
“for whoever loves his fellow man
has fulfilled the law.
“For the law code,
‘You must not commit adultery,
“you must not murder,
you must not steal, you must not covet,’
“and whatever other commandment there is,
“is summed up in this saying:
“‘You must love your neighbor as yourself.’
“Love does not work evil to one’s neighbor;
therefore, love is the law’s fulfillment.”
That means that our responsibility
is to treat others
in ways that promote peace.
When others treat us unkindly,
we endeavor to imitate Jesus.
When he was being insulted,
he did not return the insult.
When he was suffering,
he didn’t go threatening.
Imitating the Prince of Peace
and the God of peace
gives us inner peace.
In the following dramatization,
notice how a family benefits
from the apostle Paul’s example
of displaying love of neighbor,
even when provoked.
What are you going to do?
You’re just a coward.
Man, all you do
is stand next to your little cart.
You don’t do anything.
You’re just a coward.
You just stand next to your little cart.
Ain’t no neutral.
Stand up for your rights.
You’re just a coward.
Gabe,
what happened today?
It’s just that I’ve been yelled at
in service before, but
this time I wanted to—I don’t know.
I wanted to go up to the girls
and smash their phones.
I’m so glad that you didn’t.
Yeah, but
I feel guilty
because I was like—I was like so angry.
It’s OK.
Let’s keep reading.
We had left off in verse 26.
“Suddenly a great earthquake occurred,
“so that the foundations of the jail
were shaken.
“Moreover, all the doors
were instantly opened,
“and everyone’s bonds came loose.
“When the jailer woke up
and saw that the prison doors were open,
“he drew his sword
“and was about to kill himself,
“assuming that the prisoners had escaped.
“But Paul called out with a loud voice:
“‘Do not hurt yourself, for we are all here!’
“So he asked for lights and rushed in,
“and seized with trembling,
he fell down before Paul and Silas.”
Now, think about what the jailer
had done to Paul.
He could have hated him for it.
Yeah, he could have.
But I guess he saw the jailer’s pain
instead of just his own.
Yeah, Paul loved his neighbor.
He didn’t hold back
from trying to save his life.
Come on, man.
Hey, how do you have the nerve
to keep coming out here?
Look, you were right
about what you said.
No one should stand around
while other people suffer injustice.
So do something. Fight like we do.
This is my way of making a difference
—the only way that I know
the world can really change.
Come on, man, the Bible?
Look, I get what you’re thinking,
but let me show you just one scripture.
All right, one scripture.
So this is a verse in the Bible
that convinced me
of how I can make a difference.
It’s at Matthew 24:14.
Here it says:
“And this good news of the Kingdom
will be preached
“in all the inhabited earth
“for a witness to all the nations,
and then the end will come.”
In the dramatization, Paul could have reacted
in a negative way toward the jailer.
However, in spite of the way
he had been treated,
he displayed neighborly love.
And this had a powerful effect on the jailer
and brought praise to Jehovah.
Because we are imperfect,
we must work hard
at cultivating love for our neighbor.
This is illustrated in what happened
with the apostle Peter.
Prior to becoming a follower of Jesus,
he did not have fellowship
with non-Jewish people.
But after he became a Christian,
God taught him
that division between Jews and Gentiles
was not to continue,
and Peter got the point.
At Acts 10:34, 35,
Peter is quoted as saying:
“Now I truly understand
that God is not partial,
“but in every nation the man who fears him
and does what is right
is acceptable to him.”
Peter even stayed in the newly converted
Gentiles’ home for days.
And he continued the practice of eating
with non-Jewish Christians.
However, 13 years later
while in Syrian Antioch,
Peter suddenly stopped associating
with Gentile Christians.
Why?
He feared the reaction
of some Jewish Christians
who were slow to accept change.
This illustrates that prejudice
can be deeply rooted.
It takes constant effort
to rid ourselves of it.
But we must learn to view others impartially
as Jehovah does.
We want to treat others
as Jehovah treats them.
In his Sermon on the Mount, Jesus said:
“You heard that it was said:
“‘You must love your neighbor
and hate your enemy.’
“However, I say to you:
“Continue to love your enemies
and to pray for those who persecute you.”
Then, as recorded at Matthew chapter 5,
and verse 45,
he explains why we want to show
that type of love:
“So that you may prove yourselves
sons of your Father who is in the heavens,
“since he makes his sun rise
on both the wicked and the good
“and makes it rain on both the righteous
and the unrighteous.”
This love produced by holy spirit
is markedly different from the sort of love
that is common in the world.
It’s based on a higher principle.
Jesus said even sinners
will follow a policy of like for like.
But if we want to prove ourselves
sons of our “Father who is in the heavens,”
we must be different.
We welcome others
as God and Christ have welcomed us.
At Romans 15:7, the Bible says to us:
“Welcome one another,
just as Christ also welcomed you.”
The Greek word used there conveys the idea
of receiving someone kindly or hospitably
—such as into one’s home
or circle of friends.
Prejudice withers as love grows.
Remember that at one time,
we were all strangers, or foreigners,
not close to God.
But Jehovah drew us to him
with “cords of love.”
Christ welcomed us.
He opened the door, as it were,
so that we could become part of God’s family.
Since Jesus has kindly accepted us
as imperfect as we are,
it should be unthinkable for us
to reject anyone else.
Dear brothers and sisters,
divisions, prejudice, and hostility
will doubtless increase in the world
as we approach the end of this wicked system.
As servants of Jehovah, though,
we seek “the wisdom from above,”
which is impartial
and promotes peace.
We rejoice
as we forge friendships
with people from other lands,
accept cultural differences,
and possibly even learn
the languages of others.
When we do this,
peace flows “just like a river”
and justice “like the waves of the sea.”
We “work what is good toward all,
but especially [our brothers].”
Love of neighbor moves us
to make sacrifices in behalf of others
and to share the good news
at every opportunity.
Our Master, Jesus, said:
“This is my commandment,
that you love one another
just as I have loved you.”
What are the blessings
that come from love of neighbor?
Jesus answers that
at John chapter 15,
and we’ll read verses 8 through 10,
beginning with verse 8.
Number one:
“My father is glorified in this,
“that you keep bearing much fruit
and prove yourselves my disciples.”
The second blessing, verse 9:
“Just as the Father has loved me,
so I have loved you;
“remain in my love.
“If you observe my commandments,
“you will remain in my love,
“just as I have observed
the commandments of the Father
and remain in his love.”
Brother Robert Ciranko,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will now present the final talk
of this symposium,
“How Love Leads to Genuine Peace
—Love for God’s Word.”